Multiplexer article (#297)
deepset-ai/haystack-home: content/blog/build-complex-pipelines-with-multiplexer/index.md

```python
result = pipe.run({"multiplexer": {"value": "What's the capital of France?"}})
```

## Closing Loops

> 💡 *Do you want to see the code in action? Check out Tutorial __: [Spot LLM hallucinations with the HallucinationChecker](#)*

When your pipeline loops, there is often one component that needs to receive input from several sources: at first by the user, who sets off the loop, and later from other components, when the loop comes around and needs to start again.

An example of a looping pipeline is a **self-correcting RAG pipeline**. It's like a basic RAG pipeline with a Retriever, a PromptBuilder and a Generator, plus an additional component at the end that checks whether the answer given by the LLM really relates with the content of at least one of the documents that were returned by the Retriever. If the check fails, the reply is likely to be a hallucination, so the pipeline loops back and asks the LLM to try again.

Haystack 2.0 doesn't have such component yet, but we can take inspiration from a similar component that was available for Haystack 1, called [`EntailmentChecker`](https://haystack.deepset.ai/integrations/entailment-checker).

> I'm going to create a similar component for Haystack 2.0, which we will call `HallucinationChecker`. If you're interested in the exact implementation of this component, you can check it out own here, but given that custom components are not the focus of this post, I won't describe the process. If you're interested, check out [this guide](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v2.0/docs/custom-components) on the topic.

Reviewer: Can you add high-level explanation of what this component does? I tried to add something here but feel free to change it
```suggestion
I'm going to create a similar component for Haystack 2.0, which we will call `HallucinationChecker`. This component gets both the `sentence` generated by the LLM and the `documents` used by the LLM to generate the sentence. After looking at `sentence` and `documents`, it tried to infer whether the generated sentence was a contradiction or entailment. If you're interested in the exact implementation of this component, you can check it out here, but given that custom components are not the focus of this post, I won't describe the process. If you're interested in creating your custom component, check out [Creating Custom Components](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v2.0/docs/custom-components) guide.
```

Author: ```suggestion
I'm going to create a similar component for Haystack 2.0, which we will call `HallucinationChecker`. This component gets both the `statement` generated by the LLM and the `documents` used by the LLM to generate the statement. After looking at `statement` and `documents`, it tries to infer whether the generated statement is supported or contradicted by the documents. If you're interested in the exact implementation of this component, you can check out the [tutorial on `HallucinationChecker`](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1cbHRSSrkadTv-prhnFiG5d9d9RDPCIqu#scrollTo=d7CiPoKUPwuI), or if you're interested in creating your custom component, check out [Creating Custom Components](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v2.0/docs/custom-components) guide.
```

                if agg_ent / len(entailing_docs) > self.entailment_threshold:
                    print("The statement is not a hallucination")
                    return {"statement": statement, "supporting_documents": entailing_docs}
            elif entailment_info["contradiction"] > entailment_info["neutral"]:
                contraddicting_docs.append(doc)

        print("The statement is a hallucination")
        return {"hallucination": statement, "contraddicting_documents": contraddicting_docs}

    def get_entailment_batch(self, premise_batch: List[str], hypothesis_batch: List[str]):
        formatted_texts = [
            f"{premise}{self.tokenizer.sep_token}{hypothesis}"
            for premise, hypothesis in zip(premise_batch, hypothesis_batch)
        ]
        with torch.inference_mode():
            inputs = self.tokenizer(formatted_texts, return_tensors="pt", padding=True, truncation=True).to("cuda")
            out = self.model(**inputs)
            probs_batch = torch.nn.functional.softmax(out.logits, dim=-1).detach().cpu().numpy()
        return [{k.lower(): v for k, v in zip(self.labels, probs)} for probs in probs_batch]
```

</details>

> With this new component ready we can now start to build the pipeline. 

Reviewer: Can you explain what this pipeline does?

> With this new component ready we can now start to build the pipeline. 
> 
> Our first attempt may look like this:

Author: ```suggestion
With this new component ready we can now start to build the pipeline. The idea is the following:
- The query passes to the retriever, then to the prompt builder, and then to the LLM like in a regular RAG pipeline.
- After the LLM, the reply is given to the `HallucinationChecker` along with the documents returned by the retriever.
- If `HallucinationChecker` decides that the reply is not a hallucination, the pipeline finishes. Otherwise, `HallucinationChecker` sends the LLM output to another prompt builder, that creates a new prompt for the LLM. In this new prompt, the error that the LLM made in the first pass is highlighted and the model is asked to correct it.
- The new prompt is sent to the LLM again and the loop restarts.

Let's implement it. Our first attempt may look like this:
```

![Self correcting pipeline without Multiplexer](auto_correction_loop_no_multiplexer.png)

Let's try to write it in code:

```python

> # Tip: when your pipeline has loops is always a good idea to set a low number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Tip: when your pipeline has loops, it is always a good idea to set a low number
```

{% for doc in documents %}
    {{ doc.content }}
{% endfor %}
Statement: {{ hallucination }}
""" 

pipe.add_component("retriever", InMemoryBM25Retriever(document_store=document_store))
pipe.add_component("prompt_builder", PromptBuilder(template=template))
pipe.add_component("llm", OpenAIGenerator())
pipe.add_component("unwrapper", PromptBuilder("{% for reply in replies %}{{ reply }} {% endfor %}"))
pipe.add_component("checker", HallucinationChecker())
pipe.add_component("correction_prompt_builder", PromptBuilder(template=correction_template))

pipe.connect("retriever", "prompt_builder")
pipe.connect("prompt_builder", "llm")
pipe.connect("llm.replies", "unwrapper.replies")
pipe.connect("unwrapper.prompt", "checker.statement")
pipe.connect("retriever", "checker.documents")
pipe.connect("checker.hallucination", "correction_prompt_builder.hallucination")
pipe.connect("checker.contraddicting_documents", "correction_prompt_builder.documents")

# This connection will fail!
pipe.connect("correction_prompt_builder", "llm")  

# >> PipelineConnectError: Cannot connect 'correction_prompt_builder.prompt' 
#    with 'llm.prompt': llm.prompt is already connected to ['prompt_builder'].
```

> The error message is reasonable: the LLM is already receiving a prompt from another PromptBuilder and it does not expect more than one. How can we close this loop?

Author: The loop is not there yet (so 'fix' seems the wrong word), and for some reason create also doesn't seem to fit for me. How about 'complete'? Please commit the change if you like this one

```suggestion
The error message is reasonable: the LLM is already receiving a `prompt` input from another `PromptBuilder` and it does not expect more than one `prompt` input. How can we complete this loop?
```

In either of these pipelines is impossible for Multiplexer to ever receive more than one value at a time. However, if your pipeline gets more complex, you have to make sure this assumption is correct, because Multiplexer will throw an exception if it receives multiple values at the same time.

For example, this (meaningless) pipeline accepts all the connections, but will fail at runtime:

```python
pipeline = Pipeline()

pipeline.add_component("retriever", InMemoryBM25Retriever(document_store=InMemoryDocumentStore()))
pipeline.add_component("prompt_builder_a", PromptBuilder("Docs A: {{ docs }}"))
pipeline.add_component("prompt_builder_b", PromptBuilder("Docs B: {{ docs }}"))
pipeline.add_component("multiplexer", Multiplexer(str))

pipeline.connect("retriever", "prompt_builder_a")
pipeline.connect("retriever", "prompt_builder_b")
pipeline.connect("prompt_builder_a", "multiplexer")
pipeline.connect("prompt_builder_b", "multiplexer")

results = pipeline.run({
    "prompt_builder_a": {"question": "a?"},
    "prompt_builder_b": {"question": "b?"},
})

# >> ValueError: Multiplexer expects only one input, but 2 were received.
```

![Multiplexer limitation](broken_pipeline.png)

> # Conclusions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusions
```
